man made in god's image

	how can this be so?  god is the good

not made in his physical image
	-god has no physical image: quote augustine
rather made to have dominion
	-god has dominion over everything, likewise we have it over the earth and every creature on it
		-this is a point to research


likeness different from image - likeness implies knowledge of good & evil? (likeness is mentioned after the fall, and before it (1.26)
or does likeness imply the rational method?
does image imply simply a dominion?  or does that specify the rational method, and the likeness implies some starting principle (knowledge of good & evil) to judge the things of this world?


likesness - like the deity who needs no instrument - in the same way we intellectualize


	
dominion implies a judging function
	hence with dominion we were also given free will to judge

judgement had not erred until a & e created the first sin
		
man has two abilities with his will - 
	passive or active
	we all naturally have active wills - passive is a species of the active - the active chooses to relinquish it's will.
	does active necessarily imply going against god's will? 
	passive can be passive to any other will, for instance a lover's will.  

	we normally speak of freedom when we can obey our desires
	yet freedom is spoken of in terms of giving up the will
		in what way is this freedom?  freedom from desires, but now you are a slave?
		now a slave to something better, and hence more free, as free as one will ever get?


using active "free" will is a mode of pride

passivity among adam - he does not suggest a mate
eve is the "rational" one - connection between reason & desire?

passivity!!! augustine

giving up his own desires - gives up self



turning inward - memory - time
questioning as prayer, getting to self and god

god inside self




maimonides: "man possess as his proprium something in him that is very strange as it is not found in anything else that exists under the sphere of the moon, namely, intellectual apprehension.  In the exercise of this, no sense, no part of the body, none of the extremities are used; and therefore this apprehension was likened unto the apprehension of the deity, which does not require an instrument, although in reality iit is not like the latter apprehension but only appears so to the first stirrings of opinion.
"image, on the other hand, is applied to the natural form, I mean to the notion in virtue of which a thing is constituted as a substance and becomes what it is.  In man that notion is that from which human apprehension derives.

intellect determines true and false
not good & bad - this is why a&e don't even know the most generally accepted things, such as wearing clothing
hence eve sunk down into a corpreal level 
	"the woman saw that it was good for food, and that it was a delight to the eyes, and that the tree was to be desired to make one wise, she took of its fruit and ate"
it was only afterwords that a&e realized what they had lost

is knowledge of good and evil a contradiction?  because knowledge only admits of things being true or false, not good or evil

so is the decent of adam & eve from pure mind to bodily affairs?
pure mind does not use desire - it is followed by where the argument flows


