Scott Taylor
Mr. Grenke
Senior Mathematics Tutorial
18 October 2006

An Inquiry into the Nature of the Straight Line

Lobachevsky's Theory of Parallels starts by speaking of the imperfections in geometry.  One such imperfection is in the definition of the straight line.   But Lobachevsky asserts that this inadequacy is "foreign and without any real influence on the theory of parallels," contrary to the thesis of Legrendre.   One may question why he calls his first proposition a "theorem" and why he redefines the straight line if it has no bearing on hyperbolic geometry.  What is the imperfection in the definition of the straight line, and how can it be seen?

"A straight line is a line which lies evenly with the points on itself" (Euclid).  This, of course, is just one of many possible formulations of the straight line.  Another such formulation would be Lobachevsky's, which states that a straight line must fit upon itself in all its positions.  What are the differences between the two definitions?  For Euclid, a line must coincide with one of the same length, as is seen in Proposition 1.4.  But Lobachevsky adds the further qualification: "in all of it's positions."  What is to be understood by this?  Rotating a line by any two points will sweep out an area if curved, but no area if straight.  But why does he appeal to motion?  Couldn't this be done with a plane, instead of a generic surface?  

How is one to understand Euclid's definition?  Take any point, and it must lie evenly with the others.  If one were to connect any two points of the line, that line must fall upon the original line given, which is to say that the new line must not form an angle with the assumed straight line.  But is this any different than saying that the shortest distance between two points is a straight line?  And this assumes that any two legs of a triangle must be greater than the third.  Ultimately, this shows us no distinction between Euclid and Lobechevsky's straight lines.

In all of the above formations two dimensional space is assumed.  Euclid was very careful of the structure of his definition.  First he defined the point, next the straight line, then the plane as a type of surface.  Each in turn depended on the previous.  But even Euclid's definition seems to presuppose two dimension space.  So Lobechevsky must be postulating the surface, and only deriving the straight line after the plane.

But this sort of talk leads to many questions on the purpose of a definition.  Does the definition only name something of which we previously assumed to exist, or know to exist?  Does it create an idea, and hence give the possibility of it's existence?  Is the definition some sort of unique quality to this type of thing, and no other?  E.g., A triangle is a plane figure of three angles.  Any object with this characteristic will be a triangle.  

For now [since I have no answers], this question of the purpose of a definition and whether there are different kinds of definitions, and if so, what they are and how they apply to the current situation will remain to be answered.  Instead, let us turn to the relation of straight lines to one another.  Lobachevsky's Proposition 24 states that parallel lines will approach one another closer than any given distance and yet not cut, hence they are hyperbolic.  But how can one understand these parallel lines to be straight?  For a line is straight only when its slope is unchanging.  But these are straight lines, so we must conclude that the slope is in fact not changing.

Yet a slope is nothing but the relation, in a right triangle, of the two shorter sides.  In Euclidean space these will be in proportion.  But in hyperbolic geometry, the angles are dependent on the lengths of the sides.  Hence the straight line seems to be of a different kind.  And the angles being dependent on the size of the triangle leads to an amazing property, for if given an angle of parallelism, if two lines are drawn perpendicular to the base, then the triangle formed with the lesser angle will give a greater area then the one with a greater angle.

One must ask:  "Why is this so hard to swallow?"  Because the images seem counter intuitive.  What is the role of images in mathematics?  A big question, for sure, but in Euclidean space the answer seems simple.  The diagram is nothing more than an aid to the understanding.  The image is nothing but an imperfect representation of the pure idea.  To create an image is to distort the thing, but not so that the images brings about questions contrary to proof.  On the other hand, diagrams in hyperbolic geometry necessarily offend the sensibility.  Should one extend the parallel lines?  If so, must not one draw them as curved?  But they are straight.  So then either one cannot extend them (to show the property that if the lines are produced indefinitely they will not meet), or one must draw the parallels as the Euclidean image suggests.  But then where did the ultra-parallel lines go?

One of the most glaring examples is the Saccheri quadrilateral.  If one draws the summit as straight (as they should, for it is a straight line), then it no longer appears that the angle is right, nor that the distances of perpendiculars from the base are changing in length.  But if one draws it as bowed to emphesize these two characteristics, they have made the figure appear as containing only straight lines.  What is one to do?  Remove all images altogether from geometry?

One must ask:  "Why is the geometry which wants nothing to do with images so consistent with them, while the other which wants to be engrossed in sense perception is so contrary to what is sensible?"

But once again, a serious question must be put aside [for once again, I have no further truths on the matter], for as Proclus says, no proof is merely probable.  If then, the turn is away from images to the certain, one must conclude that it is certain that either Euclidean space is valid, or hyperbolic space is valid (or neither of the two, but rather some third option).  But the uncertainty arose from the questioning of Euclid's fifth postulate.  A postulate is that which is begged for.  But in what way is it begged?  Does the learner have a contrary opinion to the geometer?  Is it in this way that the geometer must beg for the student to accept his premises?  Or must the learner, to do any geometry at all, accept the postulates because they are inherent to the science as the common notions are to all of science?  

Lobachevsky seems to be affirming the former; that the postulate is uncertain, and therefore the geometer must beg and plead.  But then on what criteria is the student to accept any postulate?  What was postulated before was begged for; it was not self-evident.  The student must now take on any series of postulates which does not lead to a contradiction.  But now a priori certainty is no longer the same as logical certainty.  The two systems are contradictory.  Either a triangle has the sum of its three angles equal to two right angles, or it has less.  Either there is one non cutting line, or there are many.  But how is one supposed to find the validity of the one over the other?  By experimenting!  By finding the p for a given angle of parallelism in sense-experience, to measure the stars.  But now we are back to images, to that which is a postiori, which is dependent on experience; merely probable and not certain because of this.  

