Scott Taylor
Ms. Flaumenhaft
Senior Language
2007 March 29

Decalogue: I

1st Commandment: "You shall have no other gods before me."

Krzysztof Kieslowski wrote the Decalogue as ten, one hour films, based on the Ten Commandments.  Although one would expect each film to map directly to one commandment, this is not necessarily the case with all of the ten films.

Decalogue One involves the conflict between science and religion.  It is an exception to the rule given above, as it clearly maps on to the First Commandment.  The protagonist of the story is a well educated man with a young, cute son.  Just a few minutes into the film we see that both display a curiosity about nature.  The son is first presented to us looking at a pigeon, in the way only a young child (or philosopher) can look at anything, with wondrous curiosity.  The father is later revealed as a university professor, probably involved in a field of artificial intelligence, and a practicing scientist.

The computer has not yet been mentioned.  In some ways it may be one of the main "characters".  The computer is presented early in the film when the young boy uses it to solve a word problem.  But it later becomes revealed, at first some what subconsciously, and later explicitly, that the father believes the computer capable of having it's own "personal aesthetics", "metaphysics", and "will".

The first striking scene of the film occurs when the boy finds a dead dog outside his apartment complex.  With this in mind, at breakfast that same morning, the boy questions his father whether they print the names of those who have passed away from abroad in the obituaries.  This begins a conversation about death between the boy and his father.  The boy finally asks "But what *is* death?," to which the father replies in a thoroughly scientific manner - that blood stops flowing to the brain, movement ceases, etc.

The boy still wants more though, and asks what is left after death. The father replies, "memories of a person...what the person has achieved...that the person was missing a tooth," and so on.  Still unsatisfied, the boy asks about the existence of a soul.  This visibly makes the father uncomfortable.  He replies that he simply does not know, but retorts with: "It's too early for this talk."

The father has the belief that everything can be explained rationally, which we see both through his university lecture and the comments made by his sister, the boy's aunt.  She stands in as a pseudo-mother figure in place of the boy's real mother, who has apparently become divorced and now lives several hundreds of miles away.  We learn that both the aunt and the father were brought up in a Catholic family. At a very young age the boy's father learned that many things could be measured.  He then applied this to all of the world.  The aunt and the father represent opposing viewpoints of the world; the one being religious, the other scientific.  Yet the aunt claims that even he has room for God. 

It should be noted that "measurement" used in the last paragraph, should be taken in its most general meaning - one of logos (of a thing that can be understood through comparison or ratio with another thing).  This explains the father's rejection of the poet Elliot, who claims that "Poetry is what is untranslatable."  The father claims that the spirit of a language and of a nation can be captured by an intelligent machine which would be able to excercise free will.

The two computers at the family's home sometimes even appear to display willed action.  At one point the father notices his computer on, but he cannot explain *how* it has turned on.  The boys swears that he did not turn it on, and we have no reason to believe that he or someone else has done so.  The following dialogue ensues:

Father [ To the computer ] : "Colleague, What do you want?"
  [ The Computer displays "I am ready..."]  
Father : Switch Off!
Son: "What if it really wanted something?...You did say Colleague, What do you want?"
Father: "That's right, I was being silly."

At no point in the movie does the computer act like we would expect a computer to [act] - it always displays intelligent output.  The boy even seems to believe that the computer could tell at any time what his mother would be thinking about several time zones away.

Before I continue, I will need to spoil the plot.  The story takes place around Christmas time, and the boy has discovered his Christmas gift: a pair of ice-skates.  He is anxious to use them, and so he and the father use the computer to calculate the amount of pressure that the lake outside their apartment can withstand.  The computer calculates it to be three times the boys weight.

This is another instance of the father's belief in science and artificial intelligence.  He plugs in the same numbers once again into the program to get the result.  One must wonder whether there was really any doubt in his mind of the output a second a time.  Was he expecting an act of the will on the part of the computer? He nevertheless checks the lake that night to find it frozen over, able to withstand his weight and then some.

We next see the father the following day at home, at his desk.  Among the many books, a splotch of ink expands to cover his paper.  The ink canister has leaked.  When he goes to clean the mess up he hears a siren and sees a fire truck rushing across one of the roads of the apartment complex.

The father inquires about his son's whereabouts, until he finally learns that his son has skipped his English lesson, and that a boy has fallen into the lake.  Needless to say, he eventually finds out at the lake that his son has fallen in and drowned.

I've related the very basics of the plot because it is essential to understanding how science has been undercut in the film.  What caused did the computer to mysteriously turn on?  Why did the lake crack?

There are, of course, rational explanations for these two phenomena.  But if the movie was trying to give us some plausible explanation it would have done so.  The viewer, as well as the father, are to conclude that not everything can be explained by science.  

The aunt, a devout catholic, clearly understands this.  In one of her conversations with the son, prior to his death, she explains that God is incredibly simple to one who has faith.  This scene is followed by a chess match, where the father is playing a young prodigy.  The prodigy is simultaneously playing a score of different opponents.  When the son whispers to his father to castle, the father claims that the move is "too simple."  But he ends up playing the move and winning the match, to which the son explains "She[the chess prodigy] is using a system!"

The system is indicative of science, and a method.  Granted, computers are much better at playing chess today than most humans are, but the point to be made is that any system can be surpassed by another human being who sees intuitively (simplistically, with penetration) into the matter at hand.  This person needs no rational explanation.


There are a serious of images at the end of the film; At the present I'm not sure what to make of them.

The first scene occurs at the lake.  A large crowd has gathered.  When the corpse is finally removed from the water, the whole crowd gets down on its knees.  I do not know if this was customary in Poland for this time, and for an event of this magnitude.  The important thing to note is that the father does not bow down, but is the only one in the crowd to remain standing.

The next scene is of the father sitting in his apartment.  He notices the computer turned on, and it says "I am ready."

FInally we see the father in the church nearby, standing in front of an icon of the Virgin Mary.  Out of rage towards God he pushes the alter over, causing several candles to fall, one of which drips over the icon.  It appears as though Mary is crying.  This echos the first scene of the movie, which takes place after the sons death.  In that scene the aunt is crying while viewing the image of the child.  That same image is what we see at the very end of the movie, which is, ironically enough, displayed on a television.

I have not spoken at all of the mysterious man which is in eight of the ten movies and is featured prominently in this film.  In none of the movies does he ever speak a word.  He always seems to pop up at a decisive time in the plot, usually when the main character is making the decision which will seal his fate.  The last time he is seen in the film is by the lake when the father is checking the ice.

This mysterious man may be a symbol of God or of Fate.  He is the first one seen in the entire move by the lake which the boy drowns in.  Any scene that he is in, is proceeded by a religious image or an image of the lake.  He is a third figure who sheds a tear over the boy, resembling the Mother Mary's and the aunt's.  Oddly enough, the father never cries.

Krzysztof Kieslowski has said about this mysterious character, "I don't know who he is; just a guy who comes and watches us, our lives.  He's not very pleased with us."  Artists are always reluctant to give away their images' significance, but one must conclude that this character is someone who can divine the future, and either does not or cannot intervene (possibly because of free will). After reviewing the whole of the Decalogue, one must conclude Kieslowski's words to be right on point.  The character never says anything and does almost nothing. We cannot pin down whether he is supposed to be God, Jesus, or Fate.                                                                                       

But as for the ending, the father, science, and religion - The father cannot accept God, but can no longer view Science with the same regard that he once did.  One must wonder if he is looking for a rational answer for why God must have committed, or at least allowed, such an act.  How much does he blame himself, science, fate, and God?  Or is he just not simplistic enough, in whatever way his sister is?  How does faith come to one who needs explanations for everything?

These and other questions are still left quite open in my mind, and the film seems to be ambiguous, not pronouncing what the father thinks nor what we should think.  It has raised many questions but answered almost none of them.  

The first Decalogue does map unto the First Commandment, but as for speculating on these images and ideas, given the content of the film, we must wonder if we are missing the point.

To end the paper I shall leave you with a quote from Stanley Kubrick:

"In this book of screenplays by Krzysztof Kieslowski and his co-author, Krzysztof Piesiewicz, it should not be out of place to observe that they have the very rare ability to dramatize their ideas rather than just talking about them. By making their points through the dramatic action of the story they gain the added power of allowing the audience to discover what's really going on rather than being told. They do this with such dazzling skill, you never see the ideas coming and don't realize until much later how profoundly they have reached your heart."

