Scott Taylor
Ms. Flaumenhauft
Senior Language
1 May 2007

The Lord's Prayer

The Prayer is probably one of the most famous sayings in Western Culture, spoken by millions every week.  I will not go on with it's historical significance, except for some trivialities.  My interest in it is that for some years I had spoken it every week without ever significantly analyzing it or the context in which it was originally spoken.  I suppose the last paper here at St. John's should be a self-reflective one.  So we shall undertake an analysis of the prayer.

Before we begin the analysis, we should spend a moment on the setting in which the original prayer was given.  It's author, as is well known, is Jesus.  The prayer is given in two gospels: Matthew 7 and Luke 11.  The context differs: In Matthew, it directly follows after Jesus preaches the Beatitudes, which was probably the first time that he had gathered a large following. In Luke, the situation is otherwise, and very little information on the actual context is given.  

Our analysis will primarily engage in the context in which the words were spoken of in The Gospel of Matthew.  Granted, a further analysis of both contexts together would yield a more abundant harvest and a set of ideas closer to the truth on the meaning of the Lord's Prayer.   Now we shall partake in a line-by-line analysis.

"Our Father"
The "Our Father" is often a synonym for the Lord's Prayer, especially in the Catholic Church.  Because it is the only prayer which Jesus directly gives the disciples, and is in the Gospels, it serves as the unifying prayer among all Christians.  Many today see the prayer as one of the most fundamental among all denominations and branches of the various churches.

The fact that the prayer starts in this manner - with a plural first person - seems to be hinting at two things.  What has already been mentioned is that this is the unifying prayer among all Christians.  It should be noted that Jesus is talking to two groups in Matthew - the Pharisees and the Gentiles.  At first glance, it may appear that since the word is "Our" and not "The" Father, Jesus is primarily talking to Jews.  But in fact when considering to whom he is speaking, we must conclude that Jesus is stating the universality of God's domain, not just over the Jews, but over all men. In Matthew 7.24, he claims "_No one_ can serve two masters."  As we will see, much of Jesus' words in the next two chapters of Luke can be considered an explication, or a drawing out, of the Lord's prayer.  This is my fundamental assumption in the analysis of the work.

The second most obvious way that the phrase "Our Father" can be interpreted is by examining who is in fact speaking it.  Although Jesus is relatively unknown at this point, one could take the phrase to be an assertion of his manhood in contrast to his Godhood.  As we shall see, the separation between Man and God is a theme present throughout all of the prayer, and will be especially emphasized a few lines later.

A note about different versions of the prayer is in place here.  In Matthew, Jesus prefaces the prayer by saying, "Pray then, _like_ this."  These words make the prayer appear to be the model prayer upon which all other prayers should be spoken.  In contrast, in Luke, one of the disciples makes the request to be taught how to pray.  Jesus' answer: "When you pray, _say_..."  The second version sounds like Jesus is advocating that this is the _only_ prayer that can be said piously, or that it must be a part of a larger prayer.  Few Christians would agree with this latter interpretation, especially because the demand is for a model of how to pray, not the exact words to be spoken in every prayer.  Further, we see Jesus praying at other times in which he does not speak these words.   

If we decide to work with the assumption that the Lord's Prayer should be a universal prayer, spoken by all followers of Christ, we must reconcile this fact with the context in which it is given in Luke.  As was stated earlier, much of his berating was directed at two groups, who were presumably present to hear the speech.  We only must examine the words of Jesus directly before the prayer to question this fundamental assumption that the Lord's Prayer must be a universal one, to span all men:
  "You must not be like the hypocrites; for they love to stand and pray in the synagogues and at the street corners, that they may be seen by men...But when you pray, go into your room and shut the door and pray to your Father in secret; and your Father who sees in secret will reward you."

Today the Lord's Prayer is mainly spoken in public, usually at the "synagogues" (or their equivalent), often repeated and re-repeated, and done solely through habit and wrote memorization.  Although the public act of reciting the prayer does not have as much of a "show off" quality as the Pharisees may have displayed, it yet does not display the sense of an individual's connection with God, as (it appears) Jesus thought that all prayer should.


"Who art in heaven"
We have already seen that Jesus may have been asserting his human form is the first phrase.  At least now the separation between God and Man seem evident: God dwells in Heaven, and Man on Earth.

We should not forget the Pharisees, though, and to neglect the context of the prayer would to neglect at least some of its possible meaning.  Numerous times, both before and after the prayer, Jesus has rebuked the Pharisees for praying in public.  We have already seen one example of this in the last quote given.  But what was left out of the previous quote was Jesus' claim that they have _already_ received their reward.  What reward have they received?  The praise and honor of the earthly sphere.  Chapter Six, verses 19-23 seem to be an argument for this:
  "Do not lay upon..."
  
The conclusion to make from all of this is that the spheres are in fact connected, although one can only know how this is so "in secret" or in "one's heart."

"Hallowed by thy name"
More than a simple praise of God, this phrase looks like it is primarily appealing to the Jewish tradition.  It is well know that the Jews have many names for God.  I know that the name is something more significant than merely the thing which it represents.  My best guess is that a name in Hebrew it is truly expressing the essence of the being.  But since I am ignorant on this matter, I will not let it guide me.
                  

"Thy Kingdom Come"
Many Christians take "thy kingdom come" to be a phrase to be directly looking forward to the resurrection of Jesus, as a sort of self-fulfilling prophesy (without any of its negative connotations).  This would in fact be an argument for Jesus' God-nature instead of his Man-nature.  Either way, the phrase does seem to point to a time in which God's realm will be man's realm.


"Thy will be done, On Earth as it is in Heaven"
This seems to modify the previous idea.  The previous idea seems to suggest that God and Man's World are distinct, but that someday they shall be one.  Here instead, it looks as though God's will is all pervasive, over both his own sphere and that of the Man's.

We should pause for a minute to notice the frequency of all of the "thys" which have come up so far in the prayer.  This last one, of thine will, will be especially important in what follows.
                                                                

"Give us this day our daily bread; And forgive us our debts, as we have also forgiven our debtors" 

The word "debts" and "debtors" is often translated as "trespassers", and occasionally as "sins."  The Catholic Church has taken the second form.  Why exactly they have done this is unclear to me, although directly after the prayer Jesus says "For if you forgive men their trespasses, your heavenly father will also forgive you."  Notice that I have not delved into the Greek, mainly because of my own inaptitude on the subject, but also because the words were originally in Aramaic.  I am not familiar with this language, and being that the text was written thirty to fifty years after the original was spoken, I will not go into a thorough analysis of the specific philological meaning of the text.  But yet we can still undertake an analysis of the different connotations of these words, and whether one of them may be more appropriate than another.

As was spoken of earlier, the contrast between God's realm and Man's realm is certainly present throughout the prayer.  We have also spoken of the Pharisees who did not pray in secret, but used God's name and seemingly pious actions to elevate their worldly status.  But we have not yet spoken of the Gentiles, and the opposition which Jesus levels against them.  His main criticism seems to be the same as that of the Pharisees - that they too have no concern with God's will, but only with their own.  Where the Pharisees misappropriate the actions that one ought to do out of piety, the gentiles are instead concerned with the most base desires - material comforts and money.  Both the Gentiles and the Jews seem to fall under the category of "having two masters"; but in this part of Jesus' speech, we now see more of a focus on the Gentiles:

"No one can serve two masters...You cannot serve God and money (or riches).  Therefore I tell you, do not be anxious about your life, what you shall eat or what you shall drink, nor about your body, what you shall put on.  Is not your life more than food, and the body more than clothing?"

The anxieties of every day life seem to be at least the most obvious meaning of the phrase "daily bread."  This makes the gentiles appear less base, as who can fault a person for caring for his most basic needs?  But even the most basic needs of a man can become his master.  The substitution act which is performed is one of substituting "Our Father" for "money," "riches," or any sort of "bread," i.e., for the heavenly realm for the earthly one.

The phrase "daily bread" can also be translated as "our bread for the morrow."  This translation would be in better accord with those who view the prayer as primarily a prayer about the afterlife and the second coming.  Granted, with a greater context there may be evidence for such things, but we are primarily concerned with the immediate context in which the prayer is given, not only because it falls within the chronological sequence of events, but because the words spoken immediately after seem to be, as was noted earlier, an explication of the prayer itself.  But to further throw doubt on this meaning, we have only to look at the first part of the sentence: "Give us _this day_ our daily bread."   

To shift gears for a moment, we will ask another question on the phrasing and structure of the sentence.  We have now seen several imperatives.  If this is a prayer to God, isn't it rather profane to be commanding God?  And is it not rather presumptuous of us to assume that we shall be able to forgive others?  These questions and the use of the imperative desire to be answered.  

Our temporary working thesis may be that we are not being so presumptuous or unholy in these matters as we originally suspected.  An imperative can, in some sense, also be a plea.  This would especially be in accord with a more modern way of praying which we often see portrayed in media.  "God, please give me such and such...," or so the formulation often goes.  But this line of questioning should lead us to something deeper - namely, the _meaning of prayer_.  This question should not have appeared to come up haphazardly - for we have already stated that the Lord's Prayer is a model for all prayers, and so this must naturally produce in us the questions, "What makes this prayer better than others?", "How is this one a model for all others?", "What act are we engaging in when we pray?", and finally, "What is the meaning of prayer?"

Once again, we will shift back to our first question on this section of the prayer, which originally we were unable to perform because of certain natural limitations.  That question was, "Which word should we use in the Lord's Prayer - 'debt' or 'trespass'?"

We have now spoken many times about the Gentiles and the Jews, but this distinction once again seems to pertain.  If we look to Jesus' reproaches of the Gentiles, then we must favor the double meaning involved with the word "debt", as it has not only the connotation of "debt" to one's fellow man, but "debt" in the monetary sense.  But if we instead look to the Pharisees, the term "trespass" seems to be a better rendering of the phrase, having a connotation of law.

Although there is probably a treasure to find in the former interpretation (no pun intended), we will arbitrarily follow the latter.  Jesus has many things to say about the law.  In Matthew 5 he has shown that the spirit of the law, and not the letter of it, is the essence of the law.  But he has also said, "Think not that I have come to abolish the law and the prophets."

This should get us back on track, clearing up the question of what, exactly, is the purpose of prayer, and how this is the model of all prayers.  The lines "Ask, and it will be given you; seek, and you will find; knock, and it will be open to you," at first seem to be addressing the Gentile fixation on material.  This was, in a way, our working thesis - that prayer is a begging for God to give such and such a thing.  This, though seems unlikely, for Jesus says, "Your Father knows what you need before you ask him."  If our prayer is, or should be, for this or that material thing, it appears as though it is a futile act.  

In opposition to the material claim, we should look at how Jesus ends this section which begins with "asking."  To quote directly:  "So whatever you wish that men would do to you, do so to them; for _this is the law_ and the prophets."  The Lord's Prayer goes somewhat differently: "And [God] Forgive us, As we have also forgiven..."  But the meaning of prayer and use of the imperatives now should lay bare before us.  These imperatives _are_ a plea to God, but not for material things - rather for our will to be exercised in the spirit of the law, which is God's will.  "Thy will be done."

  
"And lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil.  [For thine is the kingdom and the power and the glory, for ever, Amen]"

  