Scott Taylor
Senior Essay


        __TITLE__


"Contrary to the opinion of Legendre, all other imperfections [of Euclidean Geometry]- for example, the definition of a straight line - show themselves foreign here and without any real influence."
        -- Lobechevsky, Introduction to _iResearches in The Theory of Parallels
        
Preface: A Short Encounter With A Student
When the student initially encounters Lobechevsky, he is amazed and yet perplexed at this new world.  The real amazement that the student feels can be seen by anyone - even to one who has never been initialized into the cult of non-Euclidean geometry.

For the most part this essay is my own inquiry into how to make sense of something so strange.  I have set the student to be the central character.  While the character does directly represent my own progression of thought on the matter, I believe and hope that the questions asked in the essay by the student are universal to every student who is determined to make sense of something so apparently absurd.  To give an idea of this absurdity, I will present just three images which the student encounters at the beginning of such a study.

(include diagrams)

1. All lines are straight.  CB will never intersect ED (neither will AB)
2. ADE is a straight line.  Angles BAE, FEA are equal and less than right
3. AB is the only perpendicular possible for the lines C, D, and E.

Hopefully you now understand the predicament that the student must be in.  He has just made his first request.  Let's go directly him.

"Nikolai, Please extend those straight parallel lines".  But Lobechevsky is no where to be found.  And so the student himself extends the lines, only to find himself drawing one of them as curved.  How can he reconcile the fact that he had no choice in drawing the straight line as curved?  He knows sight is no mathematical proof, but yet the student feels the contradiction.  Contrary to Lobechevsky's claim, it appears that straightness has actually changed.

So the student labors in vain to find the most conclusive absurdity, a contradiction in terms (known in the mathematical world as a reductio ad absurdum) to disprove this nonsense once and for all.  "Obviously the straight line is what has changed; the contradiction _umust be in it," the student thinks to himself.  And how does he labor, generating theorem after theorem, only to gain hope in finally finding the hidden trick which has been up Lobachevsky's sleeve the whole time.

Finally the student is presented with a proof that if the Euclidean system is logically consistent, so must the non-Euclidean, and vise-versa.  At this he is astonished.  But he now knows better than to search for the answer in mathematics.  He must go higher than mathematics; he must go to philosophy.


The First Alternative
So far we have followed the student directly; now we shall use his thought as a somewhat arbitrary spring-board to one particular philosopher, Immanuel Kant.  The decision to investigate Kant's philosophy is only a somewhat arbitrary one, for Kant must be the philosopher who most directly appeals to the student.  He has proved the apodeictic (demonstrable) certainty of Euclidean Geometry.   Although Kant's commentary on mathematics was finished long before the development of non-Euclidean geometry, we shall see that he yet has quite a bit to say on the student's dilemma.

We left the student at his discovery of the consistency of non-Euclidean geometry.  His problem was that he did not know what could justify calling the parallel lines in the new system "straight."  Clearly this was because he could not make the lines appear straight.


In the example (the first one given which corresponds to Lobechevsky's Theorem 16), the student is sensible of curved lines.  What is he to make of this?  That either the term straightness is being misapplied, or he is not truly seeing the straight lines.

Lobechevsky has said that straightness has not changed at all.  The student therefore believes the diagram does not represent the true straight lines.  Now the student has concepts but no sensible content to pin them on.  At this time, the student turns to Kant.  Kant spoke of concepts which did not have sensible content.  Two such examples given in The Critique of Pure Reason are spirit and God.  The former necessarily leaves out anything sensible (since a spirit must not have a body), while the later, Kant claims, is simply beyond us.  But the student sees a book in front of him.  This is not just one concept of which he is not sensible of.  The book contains a whole system of geometry.

Once again, the student looks to Kant.  Kant has described a process of empty formal logic which no seems very appealing.  But even if the styem does apply to real entities, but assumes absurd premises, one can reason this system and never come to a contradiction.  The ancients clearly understood this, and hence had the joke that this sort of reasoning would lead one man to milk a male goat while the other attempted to catch the milk with a sieve.

Connecting these ideas, we here have an explanation for non-Euclidean Geometry.  It is nothing more than a formal system.  The system refers to objects which can never be represented sensibly.  As a formal (logical) system it will always obey by the law of non-contradiction.

This explanations seems like a way Kant may explain non-Euclidean geometry, but it also raises some red flags.  If we go back and observe the method of the philosopher and the mathematician _i(source), the process described seems incompatible.  The theorems of Lobechevsky seems to be similar to those of Euclid.  We must ask: "If these theorems were not created through the intuition, then did they really arise through analysis?  Could all of these constructions of lines be somehow some sort of empty logical symbol manipulation?"  Has this system really been so artificially created?


The Second Alternative
Without discarding the previous questions (ones which we must certainly revisit), we see another alternative on the horizon.  Could it be possible that we have a priori intuitions of these objects with no corresponding sensible component?

In one sense, we must observe that the only objects we really know the validity of are the objects presented to us through sensibility.  This does not completely limit us to only that which is seen.  We can still have a priori mathematics (although it must have the possibility of being represented empirically)(quote in footnote).  Nor does this rule out knowledge of things which we are not directly sensible of.  Hence, our dull senses do not directly perceive magnetism, but only the movement of the iron filings. 

The only two things we can become conscious of are our thoughts, and the things we are thinking about.  The objects of mathematics are always generated formally, brought consciously into concepts, and later (or simultaneously) represented empirically.  So, if we are inclined to speak of formal intuitions which can only be formal, that is, never be represented sensibly, we must be speaking of concepts without (sensible) objects.  This was exactly the first thing we considered.


The Third Alternative
In the desire to explain mathematics, Kant has created the intuition to be a synthetic faculty.  How a mathematician comes up with a proof is a very mysterious thing, one which I don't even think Kant fully understands.  The mathematician has a triangle and wants to prove some relation of the interior angles to the triangle.  Synthetically, the mathematician extends the base, and then constructs a line parallel to the opposite side.  It is only then that the proof can proceed analytically (where one relies on things previously proven).  The mathematician then concludes that the angular sum of the triangle is equal to two right angles.   Kant's claim is that if one were to give a philosopher the triangle, he would analyze the concepts involved.  He would make the concepts "three", "triangle", "straight", etc., crystal clear, but the philosopher would never get to the answer that the mathematician has, and this is because mathematics engages in creation, or synthesis.

The obvious distinction that one can draw between analysis and synthesis is that where the first can be reduced down to a method (even a complete table of logical functions, as Kant has done), the later can never be.  The first must proceed with non-contradiction as its criterion, but the later has no criterion at all (save only a vaguely defined formal intuition of space).  Hence, here is the third alternative:  Kant could claim that the intuition does produce contradictory opposites, which, when arising into concepts, baffles the understanding.  

What are we to make of the idea just presented?  The intuition has no capacity for judgement, so the phrase "contradictory intuitions" alone are altogether meaningless.  The truth of this statement is seen when one understands that all of the intuition presents us with are images.  So what does one mean when speaking of contradictory intuitions?  Exactly what was said before.  Such images must be the creators of contradictory concepts.   What would the understanding do which such concepts?  Since non-contradiction is the absolute, negative principle of all judgments, one must conclude that the understanding would reject these two differing objects as both invalid, non-real entities.  If this were the case, we would reject all forms of pure mathematics (both the Euclidean and non-Euclidean) as some sort of fiction of the mind.


Foundation in the Sensible
Although Kant's _iCritique has a massive scope, one can view its main purpose as the limitations of reason's employment.  How far shall reason go?  Kant's claim is that it should be rooted in the sensible.  Looking back on this fact may give us some headway.

What the student felt to be contradictory in Lobechevsky's Proposition 16 can most clearly be seen in the Saccheri quadrilateral.  In Prop. 16, the student knows of no way to draw the straight line except by curving it.  But the Saccheri quadrilateral is different; The student is presented with an option immediately.  The line at the top should be straight, but the angles should be less than right.  If he draws the top line as straight, he can no longer draw the angles as less than right.  Similarly, if he draws the angles as they should be drawn (less than right), he can no longer draw a straight line.

But the student comes to our rescue.  "That is only appearance...That is only what I feel!"  By now the student has totally rejected any connection between the pure objects of mathematics and the appearances which represent them.  Pure mathematics has become truly pure - not only because it is an a priori science, but one which is completely disconnected with anything empirical.


The Student's Eureka Moment, or Synthesis in Action
But the student still feels the connection between the images and the pure objects, and so is left unsatisfied.  Should the a priori laws of mathematics have absolutely no relation to the applied mathematics which takes place in every day life?  Why is it that those triangles I measure out in the world get so darn close to two right angles?  Why is it that this measuring cup always fills that one, even though the person who made this one, has never seen that one, etc.  The student wishes only that mathematics were not so rigorous.  He would like to take the angle at the top of Saccheri quaderlateral, pick it, and place it on top of the angle at the bottom.  He wished that this could in fact prove Lobechevsky to be absurd.

At this quandry, the student realizes the meaning of synthesis.  Many mathematicians, including the student's hero (Euclid), and his arch nemesis (I'll let you guess who that is) have used this sort of procedure in the past.  The student's act of picking up the angle and putting it on top of the other is no different from Euclid's synthetic act in Bk. 1, Prop. 4, where Euclid lays one triangle on top of another.  What the student felt initially was in fact valid.  The Lobechevskian space cannot be represented in the Euclidean world (i.e. cannot be represented validly in flat space, or empirically on a flat board or a piece of paper).  It was the student's a priori intuition which had generated the Fifth Postulate, and no concept whatsoever could contradict that.

It is only now clear that when speaking on straightness, the student was partially correct and partially incorrect.  The straight line has retained its properties.  For instance, the straight line is still the (shortest) distance between two points, it lies evenly upon itself, two of them cannot enclose an area, etc.  But the straight line has changed.  It is now a different sensible object because it lies in the plane, and the plane now appears curved.

(Insert SVG diagram)


Kant & FP talk...need to work this in
For kant, all mathematical proofs are immediate - they are direct productions of the intuition.  Some are more obvious than others, but this seems rather unimportant for him.

there is no doubt that the postulates of Euclid are more obvious than many of the other theorems.  The ancient Greeks prided themselves on believing what came first was also most obvious.  This is wonderful for conversiing with another, and of appealing to the widest audience.  Obviously Euclid has achieved immense success at this.  But there is no necessary, apparent reason why what comes foirst in a logical system is most obvious or self-evident.  Another way to phrase such a truth is to ask if there are any proofs in Euclid's Geometry which are just as obvious as any of the postulates. 

The postulates are in fact less obvious than other theorems because they are the assumptions which do not need to be proven.  One takes such things for granted when approaching the science.  What is even scarier, though, is that few people are even conscious that they are assuming them.


The Meaning of The Postulates
For years I labored to figure out what the forth postulate was all about, and came up empty handed.  Why was it there?  What was the reason-de-etre?  It seemed so obvious, in fact, that I always believed it belonged in the Common Notions.  It sounds like a self-evident truth.  A given angle is always equal to itself.

What are the meanings of the Forth and Fifth Postulates of Euclid?  In retrospect it becomes very clear.  The fifth lays down the flatness of space, while the forth says that the curvature is constant.  If all mathematicians understood this, they would have never ventured to prove the Fifth.  They would have been attacking the forth in the beginning.  If one cannot prove the consistency of curvature in space, how is one to prove that space is every where flat?

But of course the reason that mathematicians endeavored to prove the fifth and not the forth was that it just looked so easy.  the postulate is word and sounds like a typical theorem.  Yet when one sees all of the logical variations on it, one understands how hard such a theorem would be to prove.  A triangle's angles are always equal to two right angles, a circle must always lie on a plane, a triangle can always be constructed greater than any given magnitude; these three and several others are equivalent.  When one sees all of these as equivalent one realizes how central the flatness of space is to our every day (geometrical and non-geometrical) conceptions of space.  Such a thing no longer seems as though it should be very easy, or even possible, to prove.

The lesson to be learned from the many postulates as one (or equivalent), and from our student (and Saccheri) is that one must first synthesize the nature of space before one can partake in geometry.  Once the space has been synthesized (something we probably all did as very young children), all of the equivalent postulates follow.

kant says that he sees the postulates of mathematics as valid not because they are postulates (that they come first), but because they are exhibited intuitively.  We should remember what else he has claimed was exhibited intuitively - the Euclidean proposition that a triangle has two right angles (and all of the rest of geometry).  

It is quite clear that Kant has relegated the role of the postulate (as logically primary) to a rather insignificant one.  Now they are nothing more than the things that come first in an argument.

Kant understood that one must first synthetically determine the nature of space (i.e. its curvature) before one could speak of it geometrically.  This explains why, for the longest time, no one would even dream of proving the contradiction of the fifth.  In fact, historically, such proofs ended in the reduction form (Saccheri).  It was only after carrying out the comprehensive, but unsatisfying reductio of Saccheri, that geometry could progress to its opposite.  The resistance came about because of Leibniz's belief (and one probably held throughout much of the history of mathematics) that geometry was in fact analytic.  If geometry were analytic one would be able to reduce the principles of geometry down to a table of all possible principles (much like the logical functions of the understanding).

Since the intuition is in fact synthetic, one can reject a postulate and immediately conceive of a world, albeit a strange one, for which the mathematics applies.  This does not mean that any postulate can arbitrarily be laid down.  Geometry must be confined to three dimensions.  Kant goes further than this, though, and I believe he is somewhat over hasty in his support for continuity.  One can conceive of the world of Zeno.  But Kant is consistent in this regard: Truth for him is the agreement between thought and its object.  One must have the ability to be sensible of a thing which can no longer be broken down.  So far, we have never been sensible of such a thing, and our a priori intuition tells us that we never will be.



Possibility of Different Curvatures of Space
Gauss realizes that the example Kant has given (the proof of Euclid 1.32 - that the sum of the angles in a triangle = 2 right angles) is the fifth postulate in one of its many guises.  The fact that one cannot prove the fifth postulate with out first assuming it (via the intuition) suggests to the student why Saccheri's proof was rejected.  But this fact presents us with another question.  Which  geometry is the true one?, or closer to Gauss's words: "What is the constant (k) which determines the real curvature of space?"

Now Gauss knows that there is no a priori proof for the validity of one geometry over the other.  And because of this fact, he argues with Kant's claim, that space is only formal.  He seems to approach this problem in two different ways.


A Posteriori Determination of k and Objections
At the end of The Researches on Theory of Parallels, Lobechevsky calls out to measure the heavens.  He reports that he has found inaccuracies in very large terrestrial triangles (up to one second of a degree off from 180 degrees).  Hence, here we have the first way Gauss approaches the value of K.  Simply measure it empirically!

One can pose many objections.  First, why should Gauss believe that as triangles become larger our values should become more accurate?  One would assume this to be the case and it would be in accord with the theory.  The current method would be to measure the stars.  How are we to do so?  With light?  And are we assured that light does not bend?  If light is not suitable, what material is?  How are we to determine we have the right material?

Lobechevsky's empirical claims should also lead us to some doubt.  His magnitude away from typical Euclidean triangles is very small.  Could this not be from human error?  Even if the angular sum were further exaggerated, at what point shall we conclude it is no longer the inaccuracies in our measuring devices and the error of our senses?  How far can our sensation be applied?

The second major objection goes as follows:  By measuring anything sensible we must predetermine what we consider straight to begin with.  The problem is the same that Saccheri had in the proof of Euclidean geometry.  One must first impose the system, and once done, the answer is predetermined.  Effectively by trying to measure the curvature of space, one must first synthesize the plane (and hence what one considers straight for a comparison to curvature).  


Space as Mater, not Form
The other objection that Gauss has to Kant's Formal Space is that of direction.  In the Prolegomena to Any Future Metaphysics, Kant poses us with a "paradox."  If one is to think of a hand and its mirror image, our understanding can think of no difference between the two.  How are we to understand the differences?  Only through the intuition.  That is what tells us that the image is in fact not the same hand, for the glove of the one would not fit on the other.  Countless variations could be given on this example, but the basic principle is the same:  one distinguished direction based on the intuition and not through the understanding.

Gauss takes this example as an obvious proof that space is matter, since one must first fix a material object as 'up', 'down', 'forward', or 'backward', to determine what would be 'right' or 'left'.  

How hard it is to speak of space without speaking of matter!  It is clear that these relations only acquire meaning once one of the directions is fixed to a material objection.  But the very fact that we can fix 'up' in any direction we choose is a good indication that these directional concepts are formal, and not material, although dependent on each other.


K as neither empirical nor a priori
Maybe Gauss is never expecting to actually measure k emprically.  As Kant has set down the concepts, some are a priori (with no reference to experience), others are empirical, and some are in no way physical at all extending beyond our possible knowledge (spirit and God were the ones given previously).  The intuitions mirror these distinctions, although lack the last one.  If there were to be a similar correspondence, the intuition would mirror God's intuition; an intellectual intuition which would create the things-in-themselves.

Here we see the the second way Gauss approaches this constant.  It is a thing-in-itself which we can have no knowledge of.  But this clearly isn't true.  Although we cannot determine it, it is yet something which does not quite seem like every other transcendental object.  It is distinct.  And it is sensible, although in many different forms.  Hence we would be presented with the true object of which we can have no knowledge of (the thing-in-itself) and yet also have a re-presentation of it (through sensible intuition).  This must be what is "repugnant" to Gauss' intellect.

The idea of an in-itself determinate magnitude (a magnitude determining space itself) is an idea which simply does not fit into Kant's system.  Space is not an object "out there," existing in objects; it is something which exists _ionly for our intuition.

"(NEED TO FIND QUOTE)EITHER THE OBJECTS ARE PRESENTED TO US OR WE PRESENT THE OBJECTS"  Kant's position is very satisfying for solving the problem of a priori certainty in mathematics posed by Hume.  But it leaves us unsatisfied because we are never speaking of those "real" objects "out there."  A physicist is never speaking of the true atoms, only his representations of these real objects presented to us by our sensibility.  And if, or how, they are modified through the intuition is unclear.  Only God could really know.

This sort of talk reawakens the problem of apodeictic certainty and skepticism.  In the Transcendental Deduction (in B), Kant realizes this problem, and says:

"LONG QUOTE LONG QUOTE"...

Kant's proposal of a middle ground is rejected.  And it appears as though this is accompaning a major shift in phenomenology.  Now these things are not re-presentations of the objects outside of us, but actually our own creations.  The noumenal objects are now representations of the objects we have created for ourselves in our a priori intuition.

This short talk on phenomenology may not seem very relevant, but it brings new life to the answer on the question of the constant determining space.  Space is in no way a thing out there, which we are re-presenting to ourselves.  Neither is it something which adheres in objects.  But most importantly, it is not simply the way we must think of objects that are being represented.  Those objects are actually our creations.  Space is simply the form of our limitation of our creational ability.  Hence space is a creationary act, and to ask the question of which geometry is more primary is to ask which we have synthesized at any given moment.  











