
what dynamic qualities are

dynamic quality - the force which compels a melody to move on or to be at rest.
tones in a melody are all linked
A tone must belong to a musical context in order to have dynamic quality.  Within a musical context no tone will be without its proper dynamic quality.  Outside the musical context, however - for instance, in the laboratory-tones have no dynamic qualities.
the dynamic quality of a tone is its musical quality proper
it distingueshes the musical from the physical phenomenon.
dynamic qualitiy seems to be what links tones together.  a melody by itself is composed of tones, but no tone in itself gets to the melody, nor shows where it should go
dynamic quality is not related to pitches, but to the relation between pitches

p21 - 
"They dnamic tone qualities are not a new discovery...they form the basis of most of our conventional ear training; but they are never explicitly mentioned, nor are they reognized for what they are: namely, not just another acoustical property but _the_ musical property of tones, the property that makes music possible

p30 - "it as indeed been said that our hearing of melody is not a hearing of tones but between tones.  dynamic quality seems to be nothing more than intervals with the initial interval remembered


where dynamic qualities come from

is it from within ourselves or within some abstract music or physical?

p22 - "There is no correspondence between the musical evnt and the physical event.  The musical event seems to slip through the net of the physical world like light rays through a window pane."
"we feel satisfaction or dissatisfaction according as the expectations are or are not fulfilled; these feelings we project into the tones and call them dynamic qualities."
"the fact that we develop habits when listeing to music does not prove that music originates from habits.  There is no evidence to support this thesis-except habit again...to assume that if an event has no physical cause it must have a psychological cause; in other words, if it is not objective it must be subjective.
	it is evident that dynamic qualities - what makes music music instead of random noise - is not external to us, and cannot be measured with such a devise as an osciloscope" - but this does not necessarily mean that it is subjective.  Why could it not be objectivly explained by procedures in the brain?  Although certain people may like a major scale in preference to a minor scale, almost no one likes what goes against his rules of dynamic qualities, and musicians who have done so have only done so out of spite or for the public to not confine them into a box.  Also, if Z. can set out a guide for dynamic qualities, why could one not build a modified osciloscope that would follow his rules and give a dynamic quality rating - one in which the octave has the most dynamic quality, and the minor 2nd has the least

"music is neither [subj or obj].  The conentional distinction between physical and psychological, objective and subjective reality does not apply to it.  How a thing can be neither the one nor the other and yet still exist - in other words, how music is possible - remains a major problem for philosophy to clarify.
the brain process, of course, does not explain why one likes minors instead of majors, but potentially it could, relating to personality, or on the most basic level or neurons
	diatonic pattern contains both major & minor - so there must be a 'diatonic" pattern planted in our brain
	all of this rest on our brain liking contrast of tones - "stress" as the greeks understood
p36 - "we have tentatively defined melody as a sequence of dynamically interrelated tones.  This does not meant hat, first dynamic qualities are given as a sort of material, and second, melodies are built from this material.  The relation of melody to dynamic quality is of a more intricate type.  The tones themselves by their movement call into action the forces which then shape the movement, create context, meaning, structe, unity: a melody"

further support for the mind - 
p17 - "it is not at all easy to understand how this can happen: how the whole - the tune - can be same although all of its parts have changed."
"what matters in a tune is not the tones as such but the realtions between tone and tone. - shows that the human mind does not work directly with things, but only relationally



etc/ to be classified later
