Scott Taylor
Ms. Flaumenhaft
13 December 2006
Senior Language Tutorial

An Analysis of The Marine Cemetary

A famous paradox from antiquity goes as follows: If a thing is in motion, it must be in a given place at a certain time.  But, since it is not in motion, it must not be in that place.  Hence, motion must not exist.  The point of this reductio ad absurdum proposed by Zeno was to state one thing: man is immortal.

But Valery is quick to reject Zeno for the same reason that many do today.  The poet is sitting on a hill with the wind blowing in his face, the sea is sparkling, and of course, he is sitting next a graveyard!  How could anyone argue an absurdity such as Zeno?

Instead, Valery is lead to another philosopher in antiquity: Heraclitus.  His idea that motion occurs because everything is in a state of flux permeates the whole of the poem.  Valery describes his many tombs (as if he has already died several times), he speaks of his future emenations, and even goes as far to say the sea is always beginning a new.

The idea proposed by Heraclitus, though, is quite a scary one.  If everything is in a constant state of flux, nothing can remain the same.  I am no longer the same person as I was a moment ago.  I have now lived several, several lives and I must know death as well as one can know it.  

Both Zeno and Heraclitus share this in common: they only want to assert that what is, is.  They do not want to talk about the dead at all.  But how do I then explain my own unity, and those I call "dead?"  One such way is a materialistic one.  I have no doubt that he is speaking of a general sort of particle theory when he states that all of life dies and goes back into the game.  One is material; death is nothing but the separation of these fundamental particles, and life the combinations of them.  But these particles can never be broken down.  This was the idea that lead to Zeno in the first place.  

If we cannot solve the problem of our internal unity from moment to moment, we must leave it at that.  But a desirable question to ask might be, "What is guiding these changes?  What is the principle behind the change?  Why is a thing always compelled to change to begin with?"  I believe it is significant that Valery places the sea between the pines and graveyard.  The sea is being ever created a new, but the pines are palpitating - they are beating the with the impotence of a true life.  Here the poet is the surface of the sea, embodying the ever changing quality of Heraclitian nature.  But what gives the poet life?  The sun, which is initially taken to be an immortal thing - impartial, just, and standing still yet causing the motion of others.

Such an interpretation can easily be taken in conformity with Christianity.  With the death of the fruit comes the enjoyment in life, but paradoxically this lays the foundation for death.  But here too Valery is quick to cast off an immortality of the soul.  He is but flesh and bones, or so he proclaims.  The sun is nothing but the desire for immortality.  The truth of the matter is that it only appears to stand still.  "I [Valery] am what's changing secretly in you [the soul]"

Valery has now rejected immortality - first the Christian immortality of the soul, then the materialistic one of particles, and finally Zeno's.  What is left is what was there oddly enough from the start - the always recreated sea.  The only thing left to cast out is Heraclitus, for with him, how can one live?  Valery realizes to live he must cast off the meditation, the poetry.  With the death of poetry comes the birth of true life.

I say that somewhat ironically, because I believe the Heraclitian idea is still present with Valery even after the end of the poem.  As a poet he is somewhat cursed.  Many can live, but some must dwell on life, and this later mode is that of the poet.  The contradiction for Valery is this: to live he must cast off poetry, but to cast off poetry is to not live. 

